Error field is not identified using color differences only (#1914)
auto-wcag/auto-wcag: _rules/error-field-is-not-identified-using-color-only-i3z4v8.md

---
id: i3z4v8
name: Error field is not identified using color differences only
rule_type: atomic
description: |
  This rule checks that error fields can be identified not only by color differences but through another visual means.
accessibility_requirements:
  wcag21:1.4.1: # Use of Color (A)
    forConformance: true
    failed: not satisfied
    passed: further testing needed
    inapplicable: further testing needed
input_aspects:
  -  DOM Tree
  -  CSS Styling
acknowledgments:
  authors:
    -  Giacomo Petri
---

## Description

This rule checks that errors are not identified only through color differences.

## Applicability

> This rule applies to any [visible][] [input error][] together with its visual context.

Reviewer: I'm not sure that "visual context" is objective enough for Applicability 🤔 
(see the discussions we have on the "link context" definition)

Author: @Jym77,

I've removed the generic "visual context" with a more detailed list of elements that should be included in the evaluation.
I'm not sure about the "closest error message that refers to it" is objective enough.

## Expectation

Each test target, together with its visual context, identify the presence of errors not only through color differences.

> If the presence of errors is conveyed through the use of colors that differ not only in their hue, but that also have a difference in lightness and the difference in relative luminance between the colors leads to a contrast ratio of 3:1 or greater, then this counts as an additional visual mean.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A difference in hue resulting in a contrast ratio of 3:1 or greater is not considered as difference in color only.
```

## Assumptions

There are currently no assumptions

## Accessibility Support

There are no major accessibility support issues known for this rule.

## Background

- [Understanding Success Criterion 1.4.1: Use of Color](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Understanding/use-of-color.html)
- [F81 - Failure of Success Criterion 1.4.1 due to identifying required or error fields using color differences only](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Techniques/failures/F81.html)

It is possible for an error field to be distinguishable from adjacent fields but still not have a meaningful error message. In that case, it would pass Success Criterion 1.4.1: Use of Color but still fail [Success Criterion 3.3.1: Error Identification](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Understanding/error-identification.html) and, if applicable, [Scuccess Criterion 3.3.3: Error Suggestion](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Understanding/error-suggestion.html).

## Test Cases

### Passed

#### Passed Example 1

> The first name `input` value is empty. Its error message (the `p` element) conveyed the presence of an error through its text.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The "first name" `input` value is empty. Its error message (the `p` element) conveys the presence of an error through its text.
```

```html
<label for="first_name">First Name</label>
<input type="text" id="first_name" autocomplete="given-name" required style="border:1px solid #dd0000" aria-invalid="true" aria-errormessage="first_name_error_msg">
<p id="first_name_error_msg" class="error_msg" style="color:#dd0000">This field is empty. Enter your first name.</p>
<label for="last_name" style="color:#333333">Last Name</label>
<input type="text" id="last_name" autocomplete="family-name" required style="border:1px solid #b0b0b0" value="Doe">
```

#### Passed Example 2

> The phone number `input` value doesn't match the `type` value. Its visual error indicator (the first couple of `label` and `input` elements) conveyed the presence of an error through its CSS properties:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The "phone number" `input` value doesn't match the `type` value. Its visual error indicator (the first couple of `label` and `input` elements) conveys the presence of an error through its CSS properties:
```

- font-weight: bold AND;

> - border-width: 3px.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `font-weight: bold`; and
- `border-width: 3px`.
```

```html
<label for="phone_number" style="color:#dd0000; font-weight:bold">Phone number</label>
<input type="tel" id="phone_number" autocomplete="tel" required style="border:3px solid #dd0000" aria-invalid="true" value="John Doe">
<label for="email" style="color:#333333">Email</label>
<input type="email" id="email" autocomplete="email" required style="border:1px solid #b0b0b0" value="john.doe@example.com">
```

#### Passed Example 3

The email `input` value is missing the "@" symbol. Its visual error indicator (the first couple of `label` and `input` elements) conveyed the presence of an error through its CSS properties:
- lightness (difference in relative luminance between the colors leads to a contrast ratio greater than 3:1) AND;

> - font-weight: bold.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The email `input` value is missing the "@" symbol. Its visual error indicator (the first couple of `label` and `input` elements) conveyed the presence of an error through its CSS properties:
- lightness (difference in relative luminance between the colors leads to a contrast ratio greater than 3:1); and
- `font-weight: bold`.
```
I think it would make sense to have the different contrast being the **only** difference. Otherwise, tools or methodologies that ignore it but accept `font-weight` would still be considered consistent.

Author: I was trying to maintain best practices to the passed example. Do you think could be acceptable to remove `font-weight: bold` from the passed example description, but keep it in the passed example code as per new edits?

Reviewer: We also need to exert the rule to its limit (and the tools). Since the rule considers that a single difference is enough, we should have test cases with that, even if they are not best practice. This is part of the [One thing at a time](https://act-rules.github.io/pages/design/test-cases/#one-thing-at-a-time) guideline in our design guide.
(actually, the case could even has a contrast ratio of exactly 3:1 to ensure that tools do accept that limit)
We can add to the background that while contrast alone is enough, it is a better practice to also use something else.

Author: font-weight removed and added a paragraph in background section.

```html
<label for="email" style="color:#dd0000; font-weight:bold;">Email</label>
<input type="email" id="email" autocomplete="email" required style="border:1px solid #dd0000" aria-invalid="true" value="john.doeexample.com">
<label for="address" style="color:#000">Address</label>
<input type="text" id="address" autocomplete="address-line1" required style="border:1px solid #000" value="5th Example Street">
```

### Failed

#### Failed Example 1

> The first name `input` value is empty. Its visual error indicator (the red border color of the first `input` element) conveyed the presence of an error through color (hue) differences only.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The "first name" `input` value is empty. Its visual error indicator (the red border color of the first `input` element) conveys the presence of an error through color (hue) differences only.
```

```html
<label for="first_name" style="color:#333333">First Name</label>
<input type="text" id="first_name" autocomplete="given-name" required style="border:1px solid #dd0000" aria-invalid="true">
<label for="last_name" style="color:#333333">Last Name</label>
<input type="text" id="last_name" autocomplete="family-name" required style="border:1px solid #b0b0b0" value="Doe">
```

#### Failed Example 2

> The phone number `input` value doesn't match the `type` value. Its visual error indicator (the red color of the first `label` element) conveyed the presence of an error through color (hue) differences only.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The "phone number" `input` value doesn't match the `type` value. Its visual error indicator (the red color of the first `label` element) conveys the presence of an error through color (hue) differences only.
```

```html
<label for="phone_number" style="color:#dd0000">Phone number</label>
<input type="tel" id="phone_number" autocomplete="tel" required style="border:1px solid #b0b0b0" aria-invalid="true" value="John Doe">
<label for="email" style="color:#333333">Email</label>
<input type="email" id="email" autocomplete="email" required style="border:1px solid #b0b0b0" value="john.doe@example.com">
```

#### Failed Example 3

> The email `input` value is missing the "@" symbol. Its visual error indicator (for the first couple of `label` and `input` elements, respectively the red text color and the red border color) conveyed the presence of an error through color (hue) differences only.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The email `input` value is missing the "@" symbol. Its visual error indicator (for the first couple of `label` and `input` elements, respectively the red text color and the red border color) conveys the presence of an error through color (hue) differences only.
```

```html
<label for="email" style="color:#dd0000">Email</label>
<input type="email" id="email" autocomplete="email" required style="border:1px solid #dd0000" aria-invalid="true" value="john.doeexample.com">
<label for="address" style="color:#333333">Address</label>
<input type="text" id="address" autocomplete="address-line1" required style="border:1px solid #b0b0b0" value="5th Example Street">
```

### Inapplicable

#### Inapplicable Example 1

There are no error fields.

```html
<p>This is a paragraph.</p>
```

#### Inapplicable Example 2

There are no error fields.

```html
<label for="first_name" style="color:#000;">First Name</label>
<input type="text" id="first_name" autocomplete="given-name" required style="border:1px solid #000" value="John">
<label for="last_name" style="color:#000">Last Name</label>
<input type="text" id="last_name" autocomplete="family-name" required style="border:1px solid #000" value="Doe">
```

#### Inapplicable Example 3

> Error field is not visible.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The error field is not visible.
```

```html
<div style="display:none">
<label for="phone_number" style="color:#dd0000">Phone number</label>
<input type="tel" id="phone_number" autocomplete="tel" required style="border:1px solid #b0b0b0" aria-invalid="true" value="John Doe">
<label for="email" style="color:#333333">Email</label>
<input type="email" id="email" autocomplete="email" required style="border:1px solid #b0b0b0" value="john.doe@example.com">
</div>
```

> [input error]: https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG22/Understanding/error-identification.html#dfn-input-error 'Definition of input error from WCAG 2.1 success criterion 3.3.1 Error Identification'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[input error]: https://www.w3.org/TR/WCAG21/#dfn-input-error 'Definition of input error from WCAG 2.1 success criterion 3.3.1 Error Identification'
```

---
id: i3z4v8
name: Error field is not identified using color differences only
rule_type: atomic
description: |
  This rule checks that error fields can be identified not only by color differences but through another visual means.
accessibility_requirements:
  wcag21:1.4.1: # Use of Color (A)
    forConformance: true
    failed: not satisfied
    passed: further testing needed
    inapplicable: further testing needed
input_aspects:
  -  DOM Tree
  -  CSS Styling
acknowledgments:
  authors:
    -  Giacomo Petri
---

## Description

This rule checks that errors are not identified only through color differences.

## Applicability

> This rule applies to any [visible][] [input error][] together with:

Reviewer: Not fully convinced that "input error" is unambiguous enough.
> information provided by the user that is not accepted

Does that mean that the field in which it was inputed is put in a validation error state? Or just that some code checked it and rejected it, without changing the validation state? Actually, this refers to the information, not even to the form field, is it what you want the rule to target?

- its [programmatic label]; and

> - the closest error message that refers to it.

Reviewer: Indeed, "closest" is ambiguous. It could notably be distance in the DOM tree, or physical distance on screen between the painted elements.

> - the closest error message that refers to it.

Reviewer: I'm also not sure that "error message" is unambiguous.
For example, putting a red cross next to errored field and a green check mark next to good ones, is a red cross an "error message" (it's not really a message)? (or the red border of Passed Example 3)

## Expectation

> Each test target, together with its visual context, identify the presence of errors not only through color differences.

Reviewer: We need to change "visual context" here also.

A difference in hue resulting in a contrast ratio of 3:1 or greater is not considered as difference in color only.

## Assumptions

There are currently no assumptions

## Accessibility Support

There are no major accessibility support issues known for this rule.

## Background

- [Understanding Success Criterion 1.4.1: Use of Color](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Understanding/use-of-color.html)
- [F81 - Failure of Success Criterion 1.4.1 due to identifying required or error fields using color differences only](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Techniques/failures/F81.html)

> It is possible for an error field to be distinguishable from adjacent fields but still not have a meaningful error message. In that case, it would pass Success Criterion 1.4.1: Use of Color but still fail [Success Criterion 3.3.1: Error Identification](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Understanding/error-identification.html) and, if applicable, [Scuccess Criterion 3.3.3: Error Suggestion](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Understanding/error-suggestion.html).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is possible for an error field to be distinguishable from adjacent fields but still not have a meaningful error message. In that case, it would pass Success Criterion 1.4.1: Use of Color but still fail [Success Criterion 3.3.1: Error Identification](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Understanding/error-identification.html) and, if applicable, [Success Criterion 3.3.3: Error Suggestion](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Understanding/error-suggestion.html).
```

While a difference in color resulting in a contrast ratio of 3:1 or greater is enough, it is a better practice to also use additional visual cues.

## Test Cases

### Passed

#### Passed Example 1

The "first name" `input` value is empty. Its error message (the `p` element) conveys the presence of an error through its text.

```html
<label for="first_name">First Name</label>
<input type="text" id="first_name" autocomplete="given-name" required style="border:1px solid #dd0000" aria-invalid="true" aria-errormessage="first_name_error_msg">
<p id="first_name_error_msg" class="error_msg" style="color:#dd0000">This field is empty. Enter your first name.</p>
<label for="last_name" style="color:#333333">Last Name</label>
<input type="text" id="last_name" autocomplete="family-name" required style="border:1px solid #b0b0b0" value="Doe">
```

#### Passed Example 2

> The "phone number" `input` value doesn't match the `type` value. Its visual error indicator (the first couple of `label` and `input` elements) conveys the presence of an error through its CSS properties:

Reviewer: This description uses "visual error indicator", which doesn't match the "error message" used in the Applicability. What does "visual error indicator" refers to?
(same on other descriptions)

- `border-width: 3px`.

```html
<label for="phone_number" style="color:#dd0000; font-weight:bold">Phone number</label>
<input type="tel" id="phone_number" autocomplete="tel" required style="border:3px solid #dd0000" aria-invalid="true" value="John Doe">
<label for="email" style="color:#333333">Email</label>
<input type="email" id="email" autocomplete="email" required style="border:1px solid #b0b0b0" value="john.doe@example.com">
```

#### Passed Example 3

The email `input` value is missing the "@" symbol. Its visual error indicator (the first couple of `label` and `input` elements) conveyed the presence of an error through its lightness (difference in relative luminance between the colors leads to a contrast ratio greater than 3:1).

```html
<label for="email" style="color:#dd0000">Email</label>
<input type="email" id="email" autocomplete="email" required style="border:1px solid #dd0000" aria-invalid="true" value="john.doeexample.com">
<label for="address" style="color:#000">Address</label>
<input type="text" id="address" autocomplete="address-line1" required style="border:1px solid #000" value="5th Example Street">
```

### Failed

#### Failed Example 1

> The "first name" `input` value is empty. Its visual error indicator (the red border color of the first `input` element) conveys the presence of an error through color (hue) differences only.

Reviewer: Maybe add the contrast ratio with the other border color, to drive the nail in.

```html
<label for="phone_number" style="color:#dd0000">Phone number</label>
<input type="tel" id="phone_number" autocomplete="tel" required style="border:1px solid #b0b0b0" aria-invalid="true" value="John Doe">
<label for="email" style="color:#333333">Email</label>
<input type="email" id="email" autocomplete="email" required style="border:1px solid #b0b0b0" value="john.doe@example.com">
```

#### Failed Example 3

The email `input` value is missing the "@" symbol. Its visual error indicator (for the first couple of `label` and `input` elements, respectively the red text color and the red border color) conveys the presence of an error through color (hue) differences only.

```html
<label for="email" style="color:#dd0000">Email</label>
<input type="email" id="email" autocomplete="email" required style="border:1px solid #dd0000" aria-invalid="true" value="john.doeexample.com">
<label for="address" style="color:#333333">Address</label>
<input type="text" id="address" autocomplete="address-line1" required style="border:1px solid #b0b0b0" value="5th Example Street">
```

### Inapplicable

#### Inapplicable Example 1

> There are no error fields.

Reviewer: These descriptions should talk about "input error", not "error field", in order to match the Applicability.

---
id: i3z4v8
name: Error field is not identified using color differences only
rule_type: atomic
description: |
  This rule checks that error fields can be identified not only by color differences but through another visual means.
accessibility_requirements:
  wcag21:1.4.1: # Use of Color (A)
    forConformance: true
    failed: not satisfied
    passed: further testing needed
    inapplicable: further testing needed
input_aspects:
  -  DOM Tree
  -  CSS Styling
acknowledgments:
  authors:
    -  Giacomo Petri
---

## Description

This rule checks that errors are not identified only through color differences.

## Applicability

> This rule applies to each [HTML element][] that is [visible][] and has one of the following [semantic roles][]:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This rule applies to any [HTML element][] that is [visible][] and has one of the following [semantic roles][]:
```

- checkbox,
- combobox,
- listbox,
- menuitemcheckbox,
- menuitemradio,
- radio,
- searchbox,
- slider,
- spinbutton,
- switch or
- textbox.

## Expectation

> Each test target either has no [visible][] [form field error indicators][], or at least one of the [visible][] [form field error indicators][] identifies the presence of errors not only through color differences.

Reviewer: Seeing a potential pitfall here (also when looking at examples):
This somewhat implicitly consider that we have something to compare the error indicator to, in order to decide whether it is color differences or more (i.e. "differences" with **what**?)

This could either be another field, not in error, in the same form, or the same field when not errored. 
The second solution somewhat requires a statefull rule and the tester to act (and put the field in error). This hopefully will be doable soonish (once we've solved #1953 / #2045), but that may still take time.
The first point could be doable by targeting pairs of field, passing if they are both errored or none errored, and comparing if only one is errored 🤔 

Put otherwise: if there is only one form field in the page, and it is in error, how do we check the rule?

Author: > This could either be another field, not in error, in the same form

Comparing a pair of inputs, where one fails and the other does not, is not an optimal approach. Additionally, inputs may have different styles, such as checkboxes or text fields. Therefore, it is advisable to only compare inputs of the same type and with the same CSS.

> Put otherwise: if there is only one form field in the page, and it is in error, how do we check the rule?

Limiting the rule to a specific pair of inputs (assuming the previous concern is addressed) would, in my opinion, be too restrictive.

I think we should go with the second option. @Jym77, should we put this rule on hold till https://github.com/act-rules/act-rules.github.io/issues/1953 / https://github.com/act-rules/act-rules.github.io/issues/2045 are solved?

Reviewer: I think it's a list worth bringing to attention that this is another rule proposal that would benefit from being statefull, so that we are sure the solution can handle it.

## Assumptions

> When content is communicated using colors that vary not just in hue but also have a substantial difference in brightness, this constitutes an extra visual differentiation provided that the difference in the colors' relative luminance creates a contrast ratio of 3:1 or more.

Reviewer: I think we somehow need to put in the Expectation the fact that "contrast of 3:1 or more" is **not** a color difference.
We probably need to keep an assumption that this is indeed enough, but we also want to say in the "normative" part that the rule accepts this.
